JAVA CORE INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
1) What are static blocks and static initializers in java?
2) How to call one constructor from the other constructor?
3) What is method overriding in java?
4) What is super keyword in java?
5) Difference between method overloading and method overriding in java?
6) Difference between abstract class and interface?
7) Why java is platform independent?
8) What is method overloading in java?
9) What is difference between C++ and java?
10) What is JIT compiler?
11) What is bytecode in java?
12) Difference between this() and super() in java?
13) What is a class?
14) What is an object?
15) What is method in java?
16) What is encapsulation?
17) Why main() method is public, static and void in java?
public:
"public" is an access specifier which can be used outside the class. When main method is declared public it means it
can be used outside the class.
static:
To call a method we require object. Sometimes it may be required to call a method without creating the object. With
the help of object, static method can be used outside the class. JVM calls the main() method without help of object.
Then we declare that method as static.
void:
Then we declare keyword type is used when a method doesn't return any value — main() method doesn't return any
value.
18) Explain about main() method in java?
19) What is constructor in java?
20) What is difference between length and length() method in java?
21) What is ASCII Code?
ASCII stands for American Standard code for information Interchange. ASCII character set is 0 to 255. We can't add
more characters to the ASCII Character set. ASCII character set supports only English.
22) What is Unicode?
Unicode is a character set developed by Unicode Consortium. To support all languages in the world Java uses
Unicode. Unicode characters were represented by 16 bits and its character range is 0–65,535. We can't add more
characters to the ASCII Character set. ASCII character set supports only English. That is the reason, if we see C
language we can write a language only in English — we can't write in other languages because it uses ASCII code.
23) Difference between Character Constant and String Constant in java?
Character constant is enclosed in single quotes. Character constants are single digit or character. String constants are
enclosed in double quotes. String constants are collection of characters.
Ex: '2', 'A'
Ex: "Hello World"
24) What are constants and how to create constants in java?
Constants are fixed values whose values cannot be changed during the execution of program. We create constants in
java using final keyword.
Ex: final int number = 10;
Ex: final String str = "java-interview-questions";
25) Difference between '>>' and '>>>' operators in java?
'>>' is a right shift operator — shifts all of the bits in a value to the right a specified number of times.
'>>>' is an unsigned right shift operator, used to shift right. The bits shifted in from the left are filled with zeroes.
Example: int a = ...; a >> 3;
26) Explain Java Coding Standards for classes (or Java coding conventions for classes)?
Sun has created Java Coding standards for classes / Java Coding Conventions. It is highly recommended to follow
these standards.
• Classnames should start with an uppercase letter.
• Classnames should be nouns.
• If the class name has multiple words, the first letter of each inner word must be capital (CamelCase).
Ex: Employee, EmployeeDetails, ArrayList, TreeSet, HashSet
27) Explain Java Coding standards for interfaces?
• Interface names should start with an uppercase letter.
• Interface names should be adjectives.
Example: Runnable, Serializable, Marker, Cloneable
28) Explain Java Coding standards for Methods?
• Method names should start with a small (lowercase) letter.
• Method names are usually verbs.
• If method names are a combination of multiple words, every inner word should start with an uppercase
letter.
Ex: toString()
Ex: public abstract void getDetails();
29) Explain Java Coding Standards for variables?
• Variable names should start with a small letter.
• Variable names should be nouns.
• Short, meaningful names are recommended.
• If there are multiple words, every inner word should start with an uppercase character.
Ex: string, value, empName, employeeId
30) Explain Java Coding Standards for Constants?
• Constants in java are created using static and final keywords.
• Constant names contain only uppercase letters. If the constant name is a combination of two words, it
should be separated by an underscore.
Example:
public class InstanceOfExample {
 public static void main(String[] args) {
 Integer x = new Integer(5);
 if (x instanceof java.lang.Integer) {
 System.out.println(true);
 } else {
 System.out.println(false);
 }
 }
}
Ex: MAX_VALUE, MIN_VALUE, MAX_PRIORITY, MIN_PRIORITY
31) Difference between overriding and overloading in java?
32) What is 'IS-A' relationship in java?
33) What is 'HAS-A' relationship in java?
34) Difference between 'IS-A' and 'HAS-A' relationship in java?
35) Explain about instanceof operator in java?
36) What does null mean in java?
When a reference variable doesn't point to any value, it is assigned null.
37) Can we have multiple classes in a single file?
38) What all access modifiers are allowed for a top-level class?
39) What are packages in java?
40) Can we have more than one package statement in a source file in java?
41) Can we define a package statement after an import statement in java?
42) What are identifiers in a java program?
Identifiers can be class names, method names, or variable names.
Rules for defining identifiers in java:
• Identifiers can't start with a number.
• Identifiers must start with a letter, underscore (_) or dollar ($) sign.
• Identifiers are case sensitive.
• There is no limit on the number of characters in an identifier, but it is not recommended to have more
characters.
• First letter can be an alphabet, underscore, or dollar sign. From the second letter onward, we can also have
numbers.
• We should not use reserved words as identifiers in java.
43) What are access modifiers in java?
Access control is an important feature of encapsulation. By preventing misuse of a class, methods and members
through access modification, we can control access.
44) What is the difference between access specifiers and access modifiers in java?
In C++, we have access specifiers: public, private, protected. But there is no such division of access specifiers and
access modifiers in java — in java we have access modifiers and non-access modifiers.
Access Modifiers:
public, private, protected, default.
Non-Access Modifiers:
abstract, static, final.
45) What access modifiers can be used for a class?
We can use only two access modifiers for a class in java: public and default.
• A class with the public modifier can be accessed from anywhere.
• A class with the default modifier can be accessed only within the same package.
46) Explain what access modifiers can be used for methods?
We can use all access modifiers — public, private, protected and default — for methods.
public:
When a method is declared public it can be accessed:
• In the same class
• In the same package — subclass
• In the same package — non-subclass
• In a different package — subclass
• In a different package — non-subclass
default:
When a method is declared with default access, it can be accessed:
• In the same class
• In the same package — subclass
• In the same package — non-subclass
It cannot be accessed in a different package (subclass or non-subclass).
47) Explain what access modifiers can be used for variables?
We can use all access modifiers — public, private, protected and default — for variables.
public:
When a variable is declared public it can be accessed:
• In the same class
• In the same package — subclass
• In the same package — non-subclass
• In a different package — subclass
• In a different package — non-subclass
default:
When a variable is declared default it can be accessed:
• In the same class
• In the same package — subclass
• In the same package — non-subclass
We cannot access default-access variables from a different package.
protected:
A protected variable can be accessed:
• Within the same class
• Within the same package — subclass
• Within the same package — non-subclass
• Within a different package — subclass
It cannot be accessed from a non-subclass in a different package.
private:
When a variable is declared private, it can be accessed only within that class.
48) What is the final access modifier in java?
49) Explain about abstract classes in java?
For example, if we take a Vehicle class, we cannot provide implementation for it because there may be twowheelers, four-wheelers, etc. At that moment we make the Vehicle class abstract. Any class which extends Vehicle
will provide the important features of abstract methods and concrete methods to provide implementation. It's the
responsibility of the subclasses to provide the method implementation. Abstract classes cannot be instantiated.
Though we cannot instantiate abstract classes, we can create object references. An abstract class can contain either 0
or more abstract methods.
50) Can we create a constructor in an abstract class?
We can create a constructor in an abstract class; it doesn't give any compilation error. But since we cannot
instantiate the class, there is no direct use in creating a constructor for an abstract class — it is used when a subclass
constructor calls super().
51) What are abstract methods in java?
An abstract method is a method which doesn't have any body. Abstract methods are declared with the keyword
abstract and a semicolon in place of the method body.
Signature:
public abstract void <methodName>();
Ex: public abstract void getDetails();
It is the responsibility of the subclass to provide implementation for the abstract method defined in the abstract class.